# How much is enough for genomic surveillance of Escherichia and Klebsiella BSIs in England?

This repository contains code to estiamte the same size of bloostream infection (BSI)-associated E. coli and Klebsiella isolates required for genomic sequencing to achieve a specified sampling coverage using Bayesian bootstrapping combined with power calculation. These analyses use data from the NEKSUS (National E. coli and Klebsiella bloodstream infection and CPE UK Surveillance) Study. Data for this study are underembargo until April 2027. The results of this analysis are presented as a poster at ESCMID 2026. 

# Extended methods
## Isolate collection
Ten NHS microbiology labs from nine English NHS Trusts (groups of hospitals under the same administration) representing the largest in terms of number of emergency admissions across all seven NHS England regions were recruited to the NEKSUS Consortium. Consecutive, unselected BSI and CPE-positive rectal screening isolates were collected between October 2023 and March 2024 as part of routine clinical practice. Isolates were stored in brain–heart infusion broth with 10% glycerol at −70 °C and then grown on blood agar for 24 h at 37 °C, following which a colony sweep of the pure bacterial culture was suspended in 1 ml phosphate buffer saline, pelleted and cold-packed. Bacteria were subcultured for a further 24 h at 37 °C where there was insufficient growth after 24 h.

## DNA extraction and sequencing
DNA extraction, library preparation and sequencing were conducted at GENEWIZ Germany GmbH (Leipzig, Germany). DNA was extracted using the MagMAX Microbiome Ultra Nucleic Acid Isolation Kit with bead plate (Life Technologies, Carlsbad, CA, USA). Genomic DNA was quantified using the Qubit 4.0 Fluorometer and qualified using the Agilent 5600 Fragment Analyzer. 

Isolates were barcoded for Nanopore sequencing using Rapid Barcoding Kit 96 V14 (Oxford Nanopore Technologies, Oxford, UK) according to the manufacturer’s recommendations. Briefly, sequencing libraries were generated using a transposase, which simultaneously cleaves template molecules and attaches barcoded tags to the cleaved ends. The barcoded samples were then pooled (96-plexed) before solid-phase reversible immobilisation-cleaning and addition of Rapid Adapters to the tagged ends. The library pools were loaded onto ONT PromethION flow cells (R10 [M Version]) – one 96-plex pool per flow cell – and sequenced on a PromethION P2 Solo for 72 h according to the manufacturer’s instructions.

## Bioinformatic analysis
Computational analysis was performed on a virtual machine in the Oracle Cloud Infrastructure. POD5 files were basecalled and demultiplexed using Dorado [27] v5.0.0 (super-high accuracy 5mCG, 5hmCG and 6mA methylation aware simplex DNA model). All bioinformatic tools were run using default settings unless otherwise specified. Raw-read quality was evaluated with SeqKit [28] v2.9.0. Long-reads were randomly subsampled to 60× using the built-in subsampling and genome size estimation scripts from Autocycler [20, 21] v0.2.1, and short-reads were randomly subsampled to 100× (50× for each PE read) with Rasusa [29] v2.1.0. 100× was selected to minimise the risk of short-read depth limiting hybrid assembler performance, though previous benchmarking work has shown comparable performance of short-read/hybrid assemblers in the 20–100× coverage range [1, 15, 17]. Genome sequences were assembled using three long-read-only assemblers [Flye [30] v2.9.5, Hybracter [19] (long) v0.11.2 and the consensus assembler Autocycler [20, 21] v0.2.1] and three hybrid assemblers [Hybracter [19] (hybrid), Unicycler [7] v0.5.1 (normal and bold modes)]. The input long-read assemblies used for Autocycler were four assemblies each of Canu [31] v2.2, Flye [30], Raven [32] v1.8.3, Miniasm [33] v0.3 and Hybracter [19] (long) (which incorporates the plasmid assembly tool Plassembler), where each of the four assemblies was derived from a randomly subsampled set of reads. The Flye and Hybracter (long) assemblies from the first subsampled read set were used in downstream analyses. A single 60× subsampled read set was used based on findings of previous benchmarking work [1, 15, 34] that the assembly performance of Flye is comparable in the range 60–100× read depth. The lower end of this range, 60×, was selected to minimise compute use. Three polishing modalities were investigated: long-read polishing with one round of Medaka v2.0.1 using (1) subsampled long-reads, (2) un-subsampled long-reads or (3) short-read polishing with Polypolish [35] v0.6.0 and Pypolca v0.3.1 (‘--careful’ flag; Fig. 1).
